doc/nrf/app_dev/bootloader_dfu/mcuboot_nsib: NVM protection (#28821)
nrfconnect/sdk-nrf: doc/nrf/app_dev/bootloaders_dfu/mcuboot_nsib/bootloader_nrf54l_memory_protection.rst

.. _ug_bootloader_nrf54l_memory_protection:

nRF54L Series bootloader RRAM protection
#########################################

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

> On the nRF54L Series, the immutable bootloader and (when used) MCUboot execute from RRAM.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On the nRF54L Series, the immutable bootloader and, when present, MCUboot execute from RRAM.
```

> The RRAM controller (RRAMC) can enforce access rules per region so that bootloader memory stays intact and, after the boot chain hands off to the application, is not usable for code-reuse attacks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The RRAM controller (RRAMC) can enforce access rules per region. 
This keeps bootloader memory intact and, after the boot chain hands off to the application, prevents its use in code-reuse attacks.
```

This page describes how those protections fit together in |NCS|, in the order they affect the running system: from chip reset through the bootloaders to the application.
For build commands, flashing, and signature provisioning on nRF54L devices, see also :ref:`ug_nrf54l_dfu_config` and :ref:`ug_bootloader_adding_sysbuild`.

Hardware background
*******************

> The nRF54L15 Product Specification documents how RRAMC maps **boot configuration** to locked regions and how the **UICR BOOTCONF** register supplies part of that configuration at reset.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The nRF54L15 Product Specification documents how RRAMC maps boot configuration to locked regions and how the **UICR BOOTCONF** register supplies part of that configuration at reset.
```

See `nRF54L15 RRAMC boot configuration regions`_ and `nRF54L15 UICR BOOTCONF register`_ for the authoritative hardware description.

> Other nRF54L Series SoCs use the same overall mechanism with different maximum region sizes; the build-generated :file:`bootconf.hex` file accounts for the selected SoC.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Other nRF54L Series SoCs use the same overall mechanism with different maximum region sizes; the build-generated :file:`bootconf.hex` file accounts for the selected SoC.
The region size limits are roughly 31 kB per region on the nRF54L15, nRF54L10, and nRF54L05 SoC, and larger on the nRF54LV10A and nRF54LLM20 SoCs.
See the Kconfig help text for exact per-option limits.

There are two protection families on RRAM: the RRAMC boot-configuration/RWX-disable path (described in boot order) and the older FPROTECT locking (see :ref:`ug_bootloader_nrf54l_memory_protection_fprotect`). 
They cannot be combined per stage.
```

.. _ug_bootloader_nrf54l_memory_protection_reset:

1. At reset, before bootloader software runs

> =============================================

Reviewer: ```suggestion

.. rst-class:: numbered-step

At reset (before bootloader software runs)
==========================================
```

> When you use |NSIB| as the first-stage bootloader, the build can produce a small Intel HEX file named :file:`bootconf.hex`.

Reviewer: under what condition?

Reviewer 2: described at line 32

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you use |NSIB| as the first-stage bootloader, the build can produce a small Intel HEX file named :file:`bootconf.hex` (as described in :ref:`ug_bootloader_nrf54l_memory_protection_hw_background`).

> This image programs the **UICR BOOTCONF** value so that RRAMC applies an **immutable boot region** as soon as the device leaves reset, before any of your bootloader code executes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This image programs the UICR BOOTCONF value so that RRAMC applies an immutable boot region as soon as the device leaves reset, before any of your bootloader code executes.
```

You typically flash :file:`bootconf.hex` together with the rest of the programmed images (for example using ``west flash``), so the protection configuration is deployed with the project.

Sysbuild exposes this behavior as :kconfig:option:`SB_CONFIG_SECURE_BOOT_BOOTCONF_LOCK_WRITES`.

> On SoCs where the feature is supported, it defaults to enabled: the UICR-based lock blocks writes to the immutable bootloader region except through a full chip erase, which matches the strongest form of immutability for the NSIB partition.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On SoCs that support the feature, it is enabled by default. 
The UICR-based lock then blocks all writes to the immutable bootloader region except through a full chip erase — the strongest form of immutability for the NSIB partition.
```

> The maximum contiguous region size that can be covered by this mechanism depends on the SoC (for example, 31 kB on nRF54L15, nRF54L10, and nRF54L05, and a larger limit on selected derivatives).

Reviewer: added to hardware background
```suggestion
```

If the first-stage image does not fit in that span, you must combine mechanisms as described in :ref:`ug_bootloader_nrf54l_memory_protection_fprotect`.

.. _ug_bootloader_nrf54l_memory_protection_nsib:

2. While |NSIB| runs

> ====================

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. rst-class:: numbered-step

During |NSIB| execution
=======================
```

If your boot chain includes |NSIB|, it executes inside the immutable region configured at reset and verifies the next image before chaining to MCUboot or to the application.

> Write protection for the **next** stage (MCUboot) can be enabled from NSIB using :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_SB_DISABLE_NEXT_W`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Write protection for the next stage (MCUboot) can be enabled from NSIB using :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_SB_DISABLE_NEXT_W`.
```

> When enabled, NSIB programs an RRAMC region so that the upgradable bootloader partition is not writable from later software stages, within the size limits described in the Kconfig help text (for example, up to 31 kB on nRF54L15, nRF54L10, and nRF54L05, and a larger limit on nRF54LV10A and nRF54LM20 variants).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When enabled, NSIB programs an RRAMC region so later software stages cannot write to the upgradable bootloader partition (within the size limits in the Kconfig help text).
```

This option is only available when :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_FPROTECT` is disabled for the NSIB image, because both features compete for overlapping protection resources.

.. _ug_bootloader_nrf54l_memory_protection_nsib_handoff:

3. When |NSIB| hands off to the next image

> ===========================================

Reviewer: ```suggestion

.. rst-class:: numbered-step

At |NSIB| hand-off
==================
```

Before jumping to MCUboot or directly to the application, NSIB can remove its own memory from the attack surface of later stages by enabling :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_SB_DISABLE_SELF_RWX`.
That configures RRAMC so the NSIB image region is no longer readable, writable, or executable after handoff, which mitigates attacks that attempt to execute or read back first-stage code once the application is running.

:kconfig:option:`CONFIG_SB_DISABLE_SELF_RWX` cannot be combined with :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_FPROTECT_ALLOW_COMBINED_REGIONS` on the NSIB image, because the combined FPROTECT path is intended for different sizing and locking trade-offs on RRAM.

.. _ug_bootloader_nrf54l_memory_protection_mcuboot:

4. While MCUboot runs (two-stage chains)

> ========================================

Reviewer: ```suggestion

.. rst-class:: numbered-step

During MCUboot execution
========================
```

> If MCUboot is part of the chain, it performs slot management and signature checks, then starts the application (or another loadable image).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If MCUboot is part of the chain, it manages slots, verifies signatures, then starts the application (or another loadable image).
```

> On nRF54L Series devices you can drop the :ref:`fprotect_readme` library for MCUboot in favor of :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NCS_MCUBOOT_DISABLE_SELF_RWX`, which programs an RRAMC region (region 4 in the default description in Kconfig) so that the MCUboot partition loses read, write, and execute access for later stages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On nRF54L Series devices you can replace the :ref:`fprotect_readme` library for MCUboot with the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NCS_MCUBOOT_DISABLE_SELF_RWX` Kconfig option.
This programs an RRAMC region (region 4 by default) so that later stages lose read, write, and execute access to the MCUboot partition.
```

This option requires :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_FPROTECT` to be disabled on the MCUboot image, because the two approaches are mutually exclusive in Kconfig.

> If MCUboot is used **without** NSIB and fits within a single RRAMC region, the default layout can rely on FPROTECT alone for overwrite protection, as described in :ref:`ug_nrf54l_dfu_config`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If MCUboot is used without NSIB and fits within a single RRAMC region, the default layout can rely on FPROTECT alone for overwrite protection, as described in :ref:`ug_nrf54l_dfu_config`.
```

.. _ug_bootloader_nrf54l_memory_protection_application:

5. From the application's point of view

> =========================================

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. rst-class:: numbered-step

In the running application
==========================
```

After the boot chain completes, the application runs with the RRAMC configuration left by the last bootloader stage.

> In a typical secure configuration that uses the features above, the application cannot modify immutable bootloader memory, cannot execute instructions from those addresses, and—where self-RWX disabling is enabled—cannot even read bootloader contents.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a typical secure configuration that uses the features above, the application cannot modify immutable bootloader memory, cannot execute instructions from those addresses, and, where self-RWX disabling is enabled, cannot even read bootloader contents.
```

That is the intended mitigation for code-reuse and tampering attacks that target bootloader memory once application code is executing.

Operational changes to bootloader images still require a full image update flow through the supported DFU path (for example, upgrading MCUboot when a second stage is present), not a direct write to RRAM from the application.

.. _ug_bootloader_nrf54l_memory_protection_fprotect:

FPROTECT and combined regions (when they are still appropriate)
****************************************************************

The :ref:`fprotect_readme` library reflects an older nRF-family pattern based on BPROT-like hardware locking.

> On nRF54L15, it remains relevant when **MCUboot alone** must be protected as an immutable first stage and its image size **exceeds one RRAMC region** (above roughly 31 kB).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On nRF54L15, it remains relevant when MCUboot alone must be protected as an immutable first stage and its image size exceeds one RRAMC region (above roughly 31 kB).
```

In that situation you can enable :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_FPROTECT_ALLOW_COMBINED_REGIONS` on the MCUboot image so that two RRAMC regions are merged for a larger locked span (up to the combined limit described in :ref:`ug_nrf54l_dfu_config`).

> Using combined FPROTECT for large MCUboot images trades away the Kconfig combinations that require ``!FPROTECT`` or ``!FPROTECT_ALLOW_COMBINED_REGIONS`` for the RRAMC “disable self RWX” style options on NSIB or MCUboot.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Choosing combined FPROTECT for large MCUboot images means you cannot also use the RRAMC "disable self RWX" options on NSIB or MCUboot, since those require FPROTECT to be disabled.
```

Choose one consistent strategy per stage: either the RRAMC boot-configuration and RWX-disable path (preferred when it fits your image sizes), or FPROTECT with optional combined regions when image size or dependencies require it.

Summary
*******

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 22 28 50

   * - When it applies

>      - |NCS| / Kconfig lever

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - |NCS| / Kconfig option
```

     - Role
   * - UICR programmed at flash time
     - :kconfig:option:`SB_CONFIG_SECURE_BOOT_BOOTCONF_LOCK_WRITES` and :file:`bootconf.hex`

>      - Immutable boot region from reset; true write-once style locking of NSIB span in RRAMC.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - Immutable boot region from reset; true write-once locking of NSIB span in RRAMC.
```

.. _ug_bootloader_nrf54l_memory_protection:

nRF54L Series bootloader RRAM protection
#########################################

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

On the nRF54L Series, the immutable bootloader and, when present, MCUboot execute from RRAM.
The RRAM controller (RRAMC) can enforce access rules per region.
This keeps bootloader memory intact and, after the boot chain hands off to the application, prevents its use in code-reuse attacks.

> This page describes how those protections fit together in |NCS|, in the order they affect the running system: from chip reset through the bootloaders to the application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This page describes how those protection mechanisms fit together in |NCS|, in the order they affect the running system: from chip reset through the bootloaders to the application.
```

For build commands, flashing, and signature provisioning on nRF54L devices, see also :ref:`ug_nrf54l_dfu_config` and :ref:`ug_bootloader_adding_sysbuild`.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

.. _ug_bootloader_nrf54l_memory_protection_hw_background:

```

Author: applied

Hardware background
*******************

> The nRF54L15 Product Specification documents how RRAMC maps boot configuration to locked regions and how the **UICR BOOTCONF** register supplies part of that configuration at reset.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The nRF54L15 Product Specification documents how RRAMC maps boot configuration to locked regions and how the UICR BOOTCONF register supplies part of that configuration at reset.
```

The region size limits are roughly 31 kB per region on the nRF54L15, nRF54L10, and nRF54L05 SoC, and larger on the nRF54LV10A and nRF54LLM20 SoCs.
See the Kconfig help text for exact per-option limits.

There are two protection families on RRAM: the RRAMC boot-configuration/RWX-disable path (described in boot order) and the older FPROTECT locking (see :ref:`ug_bootloader_nrf54l_memory_protection_fprotect`).
They cannot be combined per stage.

.. _ug_bootloader_nrf54l_memory_protection_reset:

.. rst-class:: numbered-step

At reset (before bootloader software runs)
==========================================

When you use |NSIB| as the first-stage bootloader, the build can produce a small Intel HEX file named :file:`bootconf.hex`.
This image programs the UICR BOOTCONF value so that RRAMC applies an immutable boot region as soon as the device leaves reset, before any of your bootloader code executes.
You typically flash :file:`bootconf.hex` together with the rest of the programmed images (for example using ``west flash``), so the protection configuration is deployed with the project.

> Sysbuild exposes this behavior as :kconfig:option:`SB_CONFIG_SECURE_BOOT_BOOTCONF_LOCK_WRITES`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sysbuild exposes this behavior in the :kconfig:option:`SB_CONFIG_SECURE_BOOT_BOOTCONF_LOCK_WRITES` Kconfig option.
```

On SoCs that support the feature, it is enabled by default.
The UICR-based lock then blocks all writes to the immutable bootloader region except through a full chip erase-the strongest form of immutability for the NSIB partition.

If the first-stage image does not fit in that span, you must combine mechanisms as described in :ref:`ug_bootloader_nrf54l_memory_protection_fprotect`.

.. _ug_bootloader_nrf54l_memory_protection_nsib:

.. rst-class:: numbered-step

During |NSIB| execution
=======================

If your boot chain includes |NSIB|, it executes inside the immutable region configured at reset and verifies the next image before chaining to MCUboot or to the application.

> Write protection for the next stage (MCUboot) can be enabled from NSIB using :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_SB_DISABLE_NEXT_W`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Write protection for the next stage (MCUboot) can be enabled from NSIB using the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_SB_DISABLE_NEXT_W` Kconfig option.
```

When enabled, NSIB programs an RRAMC region so later software stages including MCUboot itself cannot write to the upgradable bootloader partition (within the size limits in the Kconfig help text).

This option is only available when :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_FPROTECT` is disabled for the NSIB image, because both features compete for overlapping protection resources.

.. _ug_bootloader_nrf54l_memory_protection_nsib_handoff:

.. rst-class:: numbered-step

At |NSIB| hand-off
==================

> Before jumping to MCUboot or directly to the application, NSIB can remove its own memory from the attack surface of later stages by enabling :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_SB_DISABLE_SELF_RWX`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before jumping to MCUboot or directly to the application, NSIB can remove its own memory from the attack surface of later stages. 
You can include this behavior by enabling the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_SB_DISABLE_SELF_RWX` Kconfig option.
```

> That configures RRAMC so the NSIB image region is no longer readable, writable, or executable after handoff, which mitigates attacks that attempt to execute or read back first-stage code once the application is running.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This option configures RRAMC so the NSIB image region is no longer readable, writable, or executable after handoff, which mitigates attacks that attempt to execute or read back first-stage code once the application is running.
```

> :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_SB_DISABLE_SELF_RWX` cannot be combined with :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_FPROTECT_ALLOW_COMBINED_REGIONS` on the NSIB image, because the combined FPROTECT path is intended for different sizing and locking trade-offs on RRAM.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_SB_DISABLE_SELF_RWX` Kconfig option cannot be combined with :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_FPROTECT_ALLOW_COMBINED_REGIONS` on the NSIB image, because the combined FPROTECT path is intended for different sizing and locking trade-offs on RRAM.
```

.. _ug_bootloader_nrf54l_memory_protection_mcuboot:

.. rst-class:: numbered-step

During MCUboot execution
========================

If MCUboot is part of the chain, it manages slots, verifies signatures, then starts the application (or another loadable image).

> On nRF54L Series devices you can replace the :ref:`fprotect_readme` library for MCUboot with the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NCS_MCUBOOT_DISABLE_SELF_RWX` Kconfig option.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On the nRF54L Series devices you can replace the :ref:`fprotect_readme` library for MCUboot with the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NCS_MCUBOOT_DISABLE_SELF_RWX` Kconfig option.
```

This programs an RRAMC region (region 4 by default) so that later stages lose read, write, and execute access to the MCUboot partition.

> This option requires :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_FPROTECT` to be disabled on the MCUboot image, because the two approaches are mutually exclusive in Kconfig.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use this option you must disable :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_FPROTECT` on the MCUboot image, because the two approaches are mutually exclusive in Kconfig.
```

If MCUboot is used without NSIB and fits within a single RRAMC region, the default layout can rely on FPROTECT alone for overwrite protection, as described in :ref:`ug_nrf54l_dfu_config`.

.. _ug_bootloader_nrf54l_memory_protection_application:
.. rst-class:: numbered-step

In the running application
==========================

After the boot chain completes, the application runs with the RRAMC configuration left by the last bootloader stage.

> In a typical secure configuration that uses the features above, the application cannot modify immutable bootloader memory, cannot execute instructions from those addresses, and, where self-RWX disabling is enabled, cannot even read bootloader contents.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a typical secure configuration that uses these features, the application cannot: 

* Modify immutable bootloader memory
* Execute instructions from addresses
* Read bootloader contents where self-RWX disabling is enabled

```

That is the intended mitigation for code-reuse and tampering attacks that target bootloader memory once application code is executing.

Operational changes to bootloader images still require a full image update flow through the supported DFU path (for example, upgrading MCUboot when a second stage is present), not a direct write to RRAM from the application.

.. _ug_bootloader_nrf54l_memory_protection_fprotect:

FPROTECT and combined regions (when they are still appropriate)
****************************************************************

The :ref:`fprotect_readme` library reflects an older nRF-family pattern based on BPROT-like hardware locking.

> On nRF54L15, it remains relevant when MCUboot alone must be protected as an immutable first stage and its image size exceeds one RRAMC region (above roughly 31 kB).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On the nRF54L15 SoC, it remains relevant when MCUboot alone must be protected as an immutable first stage and its image size exceeds one RRAMC region (above roughly 31 kB).
```

> In that situation you can enable :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_FPROTECT_ALLOW_COMBINED_REGIONS` on the MCUboot image so that two RRAMC regions are merged for a larger locked span (up to the combined limit described in :ref:`ug_nrf54l_dfu_config`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In that situation, enable the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_FPROTECT_ALLOW_COMBINED_REGIONS` Kconfig option on the MCUboot image so that two RRAMC regions are merged for a larger locked span (up to the combined limit described in :ref:`ug_nrf54l_dfu_config`).
```

For build commands, flashing, and signature provisioning on nRF54L devices, see also :ref:`ug_nrf54l_dfu_config` and :ref:`ug_bootloader_adding_sysbuild`.

.. _ug_bootloader_nrf54l_memory_protection_hw_background:

Hardware background
*******************

The nRF54L15 Product Specification documents how RRAMC maps boot configuration to locked regions and how the UICR BOOTCONF register supplies part of that configuration at reset.
See `nRF54L15 RRAMC regions protection`_ and `nRF54L15 UICR BOOTCONF register`_ for the authoritative hardware description.
Other nRF54L Series SoCs use the same overall mechanism with different maximum region sizes; the build-generated :file:`bootconf.hex` file accounts for the selected SoC.
The region size limits are roughly 31 kB per region on the nRF54L15, nRF54L10, and nRF54L05 SoC, and larger on the nRF54LV10A and nRF54LLM20 SoCs.
See the Kconfig help text for exact per-option limits.

There are two protection families on RRAM: the RRAMC boot-configuration/RWX-disable path (described in boot order) and the older FPROTECT locking (see :ref:`ug_bootloader_nrf54l_memory_protection_fprotect`).

> They cannot be combined per stage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You cannot combine them per stage.
```

Write protection for the next stage (MCUboot) can be enabled from NSIB using the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_SB_DISABLE_NEXT_W` Kconfig option.
When enabled, NSIB programs an RRAMC region so later software stages including MCUboot itself cannot write to the upgradable bootloader partition (within the size limits in the Kconfig help text).

This option is only available when :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_FPROTECT` is disabled for the NSIB image, because both features compete for overlapping protection resources.

.. _ug_bootloader_nrf54l_memory_protection_nsib_handoff:

.. rst-class:: numbered-step

At |NSIB| hand-off
==================

Before jumping to MCUboot or directly to the application, NSIB can remove its own memory from the attack surface of later stages.
You can include this behavior by enabling the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_SB_DISABLE_SELF_RWX` Kconfig option.
This option configures RRAMC so the NSIB image region is no longer readable, writable, or executable after handoff, which mitigates attacks that attempt to execute or read back first-stage code once the application is running.

> The :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_SB_DISABLE_SELF_RWX` Kconfig option cannot be combined with :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_FPROTECT_ALLOW_COMBINED_REGIONS` on the NSIB image, because the combined FPROTECT path is intended for different sizing and locking trade-offs on RRAM.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You cannot combine the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_SB_DISABLE_SELF_RWX` Kconfig option with :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_FPROTECT_ALLOW_COMBINED_REGIONS` on the NSIB image, because the combined FPROTECT path is intended for different sizing and locking trade-offs on RRAM.
```

Choosing combined FPROTECT for large MCUboot images means you cannot also use the RRAMC "disable self RWX" options on NSIB or MCUboot, since those require FPROTECT to be disabled.
Choose one consistent strategy per stage: either the RRAMC boot-configuration and RWX-disable path (preferred when it fits your image sizes), or FPROTECT with optional combined regions when image size or dependencies require it.

Summary
*******

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 22 28 50

   * - When it applies
     - |NCS| / Kconfig option
     - Role
   * - UICR programmed at flash time
     - :kconfig:option:`SB_CONFIG_SECURE_BOOT_BOOTCONF_LOCK_WRITES` and :file:`bootconf.hex`
     - Immutable boot region from reset; true write-once locking of NSIB span in RRAMC.
   * - During NSIB, before chaining
     - :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_SB_DISABLE_NEXT_W`
     - Write-disables the next bootloader partition (typically MCUboot), within region size limits.
   * - End of NSIB
     - :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_SB_DISABLE_SELF_RWX`
     - Removes read, write, and execute access to NSIB program memory for later stages.
   * - End of MCUboot

>      - :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NCS_MCUBOOT_DISABLE_SELF_RWX`

Reviewer: Is this option not added? Link doesn't work here

Author: this is Kconfig option available in sdk-mcuboot. As I just checked, situation is similar for any sdk-mcuboot own Kconfig option.
